IP stands for Internet protocol.
An IP address is a unique address for
every machine on the Internet.
So every machine has to have it.
If you're going to speak on the Internet,
you gotta have your own IP address.
TCP/IP uses IP address
as this unique address.
TCP/IP that I'm naming like that,
those are two protocols.
And these two protocols IP is essential.
TCP or UDP are another pair or
protocols that we will talk about later.
But these protocols are the protocols
that make up the Internet, right?
So if you speak TCP and then you speak IP,
then you are using the Internet.
And if you don't, then you're not
using Internet, that's the idea.
So, in order to use the Internet,
you gotta have a unique IP address.
Now, it's a unique number,
And IP version 4,
the old version, the one that is probably
still most in use, but the old version.
It uses 32-bit addresses.
So 32-bit means, 4 bytes.
And each byte, normally the way you
see it commonly are four numbers
written in decimal separated by period.
So in this case, 192.0.0.0.
Four numbers, each one is between 0 and
255, because that's the byte,
a byte it represents
a number between 0 and 255.
So, [COUGH] that's what
an IP address looks like.
Often the address is considered in
two parts, low bytes and high bytes.
So, the network address,
the high byte that are common across
an entire wide area network,
like for instance on campus.
Maybe every address on campus has the same
two high bytes, something like that,
where the host address, the low bytes are
the ones that are going to be unique for
each individual host, each individual
machine on campus, lets say.
So those are IP addresses.
Now IPv6 is the new IP version,
when I say new, it's been around for
a while but still not fully accepted.
It uses 128 bit addresses.
So as compared to 32 bit addresses
with IPv5, that's a typo, IPv5.
Sorry, IPv4,
the current one is a 32 bit addresses.
The new one is 128 bit,
so much bigger addresses.
IPv4 only supports 2 to the 32 addresses,
maximum, right?
because it's only got 32-bits.
Internet already exceeds that number.
There's more than 2 to 32 machines
on a network at any given time.
So there are tricks that are pulled
in order to do that, right?
because you can't have more
than 232 unique IP addresses,
if you've only got 32-bits.
So people use network address
translation to fake that out, okay?
We're not going to talk about that
in this class, but it's a limit and
it's a limit that's being exceeded.
But eventually you've
gotta increase the size.
If you want to increase the number
of machines on a network,
you've got to go to a longer address, so
that you can have enough unique addresses.
IPv6 also integrates security, so
it uses IPSec to encrypt data in transit,
which is a good thing.
Regular [COUGH] IPv4 does not
do any encryption all by itself,
which makes it vulnerable.
IPv6 incorporates several other
changes to the header, so
some fields become optional and
things like this.
But these are all details that
we don't have to worry about,
we're going to be using
IPv4 addresses anyway.
IPv6 is not widely adopted yet,
it needs to be.
Now, ports.
A port number is a unique identifier for
an application on a machine.
So IP addresses,
they uniquely identify the machine, but
on a particular machine, there may be many
applications running on that machine.
And each application maybe want
to talk on the network, right,
to other machines on the network.
So then each application on the machine
has a different port number, okay?
So the IP protocol it uses IP
addresses to refer to a machine.
But to refer to particular
applications on a particular machine,
you would use either the TCP or the UDP
protocol, talk more about them later.
But TCP, UDP and their addressing,
they use port numbers for the addressing.
So, here's what I mean,
these ports to address a specific
application on a machine.
So, as an example, you can have
a machine that wants to talk on,
maybe you want to use a browser, right?
So web browsers use port 80, web servers
rather, they use port 80, right?
So web browser sends a page request
on port 80 to the web server, and
the server is always listening
to port 80 for request, right?
So port 80 has to be open for
a web server to be used,
because port 80 is known as the place
that web servers are listening to,
as the port web servers are listening to.
So, and that's just one application,
say I've got Secure Shell.
Secure Shell server it's
known to be a port 22, okay?
So every application type
has its own port number.
And so these ports,
this is what I was saying actually in a
previously lecture about firewalls, right?
These ports have to be open.
They can't be blocked by a firewall,
alright?
A firewall could just block
off traffic in a port, and
if you want to use a web server, then
you gotta have port 80 open and so on.
You gotta be able to write on port 80.
So, it's a 16 bit value in the TCP or
UDP header.
16 bit value meaning you can have,
roughly 2 to 16 port numbers.
The low port numbers are the ones
dedicated to particular applications,
like when I say low 1023 and below.
Above that they're just open ports,
you can use them for whatever you want.
Thank you.